README.md, before:

# Contrib Codex

> **Transform Git noise into engineering signal.**  
> Contrib Codex isn't just a stats generator—it's a repository forensics tool that bridges the gap between raw commit data and actionable technical insights using AI.

Contrib Codex is a Java-based Git analytics tool that generates contributor graphs and change metrics from your repositories, then uses an LLM provider (Groq/OpenAI/etc.) to turn those metrics into engineering audits.

<!-- 
<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/images/main_ui_snapshot.png" alt="Contrib Codex UI" width="800">
</p>
-->

## Features

- **Meaningful Change Detection:** Heuristic-based scoring that prioritizes core logic and tests over boilerplate and lockfile noise.
- **Refactoring Recognition:** Rewards technical debt reduction by identifying significant deletions and architectural cleanups.
- **AI Audit Reports:** Seamlessly integrates with OpenAI, Groq, or Ollama to generate deep-dive contributor reviews and risk assessments.
- **Visual Analytics:** Interactive Pie, Bar, and Line charts tracking impact, activity, and commit density over time.
- **Privacy First:** All analysis is performed locally; API keys are encrypted with AES-256, and metrics are stored in a local SQLite database.
- **Open Source:** Licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 (GPL-3.0).

<!-- 
<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/images/pdf_report_preview.png" alt="PDF Report Preview" width="600">
</p>
-->

## Why Contrib Codex? (Scenarios)

*   **Engineering Leaders:** Perform non-intrusive "health checks" on repositories to identify bottlenecks or high-risk bulk commit patterns.
*   **Onboarding:** Quickly understand the "who" and "where" of a new codebase by seeing which contributors own specific architectural components.
*   **Code Quality Audits:** Supplement manual reviews with AI-driven heuristics that highlight suspicious activity or lack of test coverage relative to feature complexity.
*   **Technical Debt Management:** Identify contributors who excel at refactoring and cleaning up code, not just those adding the most lines.

## Setup Instructions

### Prerequisites

- **Java 25** or higher.
- **Maven** (for building and running).

### Building the Project

Clone the repository and run the following command in the root directory:

```bash
mvn clean compile
```

### Running the Application

To launch the GUI, use the JavaFX Maven plugin:

```bash
mvn javafx:run
```

## How to Use

1. **Select Repository:** Click "Browse..." to select a local Git repository.
2. **Configure Settings:**
    - **Git Tree Commits:** Set the number of recent commits to display. Set to `0` to view all commits back to the initial commit.
    - **Ignore Extensions:** Comma-separated list of file extensions to exclude from analysis (e.g., `json, csv`).
    - **Ignore Folders:** Comma-separated list of folders to exclude from analysis (e.g., `node_modules, target`).
    - **MD Folder:** Optional path to a folder containing `.md` files. Each file will be added as a section in the PDF and included as context for the LLM.
3. **Analyze:** Click "Analyze" to process the repository.
4. **Merge Users:** Right-click a user in the table to merge them with another identity (useful for multiple emails).
5. **API Keys:** Use the **Settings -> API Keys...** menu to set your OpenAI or Groq keys for LLM report generation.
6. **Export:** Click "Export to PDF" to save a visual and detailed report.

## Technical Details

- **Language:** Java 25
- **UI Framework:** JavaFX 23
- **Git Library:** JGit
- **Database:** SQLite (JDBC)
- **PDF Library:** OpenPDF
- **Charts:** JavaFX Charts (Pie, Bar)

Commit message:

Enhance scoring and UI for blank lines, Groq models, and contributor analysis
Added blank line and meaningless commit detection to contributor scoring in GitService, including penalties for excessive blank lines and commits with no logic changes. Improved the API key settings UI to support fetching and selecting Groq models dynamically. Introduced a method to analyze and display top impactful files per contributor, and updated the metrics output to include this information. Updated markdown templates and documentation to reflect new requirements alignment and contributor analysis features.

README.md, after:

# Contrib Codex

> **Transform Git noise into engineering signal.**  
> Contrib Codex isn't just a stats generator—it's a repository forensics tool that bridges the gap between raw commit data and actionable technical insights using AI.

Contrib Codex is a Java-based Git analytics tool that generates contributor graphs and change metrics from your repositories, then uses an LLM provider (Groq/OpenAI/etc.) to turn those metrics into engineering audits.

<!-- 
<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/images/main_ui_snapshot.png" alt="Contrib Codex UI" width="800">
</p>
-->

## Features

- **Meaningful Change Detection:** Heuristic-based scoring that prioritizes core logic and tests over boilerplate and lockfile noise.
- **Refactoring Recognition:** Rewards technical debt reduction by identifying significant deletions and architectural cleanups.
- **AI Audit Reports:** Seamlessly integrates with OpenAI, Groq, or Ollama to generate deep-dive contributor reviews and risk assessments.
- **Visual Analytics:** Interactive Pie, Bar, and Line charts tracking impact, activity, and commit density over time.
- **Privacy First:** All analysis is performed locally; API keys are encrypted with AES-256, and metrics are stored in a local SQLite database.
- **Open Source:** Licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 (GPL-3.0).

<!-- 
<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/images/pdf_report_preview.png" alt="PDF Report Preview" width="600">
</p>
-->

## Why Contrib Codex? (Scenarios)

*   **Engineering Leaders:** Perform non-intrusive "health checks" on repositories to identify bottlenecks or high-risk bulk commit patterns.
*   **Onboarding:** Quickly understand the "who" and "where" of a new codebase by seeing which contributors own specific architectural components.
*   **Code Quality Audits:** Supplement manual reviews with AI-driven heuristics that highlight suspicious activity or lack of test coverage relative to feature complexity.
*   **Technical Debt Management:** Identify contributors who excel at refactoring and cleaning up code, not just those adding the most lines.

## Setup Instructions

### Prerequisites

- **Java 25** or higher.
- **Maven** (for building and running).

### Building the Project

Clone the repository and run the following command in the root directory:

```bash
mvn clean compile
```

### Running the Application

To launch the GUI, use the JavaFX Maven plugin:

```bash
mvn javafx:run
```

## How to Use

1. **Select Repository:** Click "Browse..." to select a local Git repository.
2. **Configure Settings:**
    - **Git Tree Commits:** Set the number of recent commits to display. Set to `0` to view all commits back to the initial commit.
    - **Ignore Extensions:** Comma-separated list of file extensions to exclude from analysis (e.g., `json, csv`).
    - **Ignore Folders:** Comma-separated list of folders to exclude from analysis (e.g., `node_modules, target`).
    - **MD Folder:** Optional path to a folder containing `.md` files. Each file will be added as a section in the PDF and included as context for the LLM.
3. **Analyze:** Click "Analyze" to process the repository.
4. **Merge Users:** Right-click a user in the table to merge them with another identity (useful for multiple emails).
5. **LLM Configuration (Settings -> API Keys...):** 
    - **API Keys:** Provide your OpenAI or Groq API keys. Keys are stored locally and encrypted.
    - **Model Selection:** Select or manually enter the model name (e.g., `gpt-4o` for OpenAI or `mixtral-8x7b-32768` for Groq).
    - **Fetch Models:** For Groq and Ollama, use the "Fetch Models" button to automatically retrieve a list of available models from their respective APIs.
6. **Export:** Click "Export to PDF" to save a visual and detailed report.

## Contributor Scoring & Penalties

Contrib Codex uses a multi-layered heuristic to calculate a **Meaningful Change Score** (0-100) for every contributor:

- **Iterative Bonus:** Rewarded for smaller, focused commits (< 250-500 lines) rather than bulk "dumps".
- **Quality Signal:** Points added for touching test files alongside source code.
- **Refactoring Reward:** Significant points added for net code reduction (deletions > 50% of additions).
- **Meaningless Change Penalty:**
    - Contributors are penalized for committing **blank lines** (if they exceed 20% of the total change).
    - Commits with **zero logic changes** or only whitespace changes result in a deduction from the final score.
- **AI Refinement:** If an AI report is generated, the LLM further refines these scores based on commit message clarity and qualitative impact.

## Technical Details

- **Language:** Java 25
- **UI Framework:** JavaFX 23
- **Git Library:** JGit
- **Database:** SQLite (JDBC)
- **PDF Library:** OpenPDF
- **Charts:** JavaFX Charts (Pie, Bar)
